Need of virtual machines:
a.Isolation: 
Virtual machines isolate an operating system from the physical hardware and from other virtual machines. 
This provides security, stability and fault isolation.
b.Resource sharing



Services:

SaaS Service:
Completely is handled by the service provider.
ex:
Outlook, OneDrive,Gmail, Docs, GDrive


PaaS Service: 
Platform as a service (PaaS) is a complete development and deployment environment in the cloud.
Like IaaS, PaaS includes infrastructure—servers, storage, and networking—but also middleware, development tools, business intelligence (BI) services, database management systems, and more.
PaaS stands for Platform as a Service. It is a cloud computing model that provides developers with tools 
and services to build, test and deploy applications without having to manage the underlying infrastructure.

Some key features of PaaS are:
->The cloud vendor takes care of the infrastructure including servers, storage, networking, operating systems etc. 
  Developers only need to focus on application development.
->PaaS provides development tools, APIs, libraries and databases that developers can use to build their applications

ex:Heruko, Firebase,
Azure SQL: Customers who purchase Azure SQL Database don't need to maintain anything related to SQL platform
because Microsoft manages that. They just use it by deploying their tables and data and consuming it with their
applications. That's why this is a Platform as a Service model. It's not Software as a Service because they still
need to maintain the database in order for their applications to work.


IaaS Service:
storage, network, CPU
Providing VM's is example of IaaS
ex:
Azure 
DigitalOcean:
A popular IaaS provider for developers, it offers virtual machines, object storage, firewalls, load balancers and more. It has a simple and streamlined user interface.







Something else:

IaC (Infrastructure as Code): 
IaC refers to the practice of provisioning and managing infrastructure (whether on-premises or in the cloud) through code. 
It uses tools like CloudFormation, Terraform, ARM templates, Ansible, Chef, etc.




Cloud deployment Models:

Private cloud:
Everything runs on your own datacenter.
Self-service should be provided.
ex:
An enterprise's own data center that is managed as a cloud environment, 
providing resources on-demand to users within the organization.

Public cloud:
Everything runs on cloud provider hardware.
No local hardware.
Some services share hardware with other customers.
ex: Microsoft Azure, AWS, IBM Cloud

Hybrid cloud:
Combines both Public & Private cloud.
ex:
An organization uses Amazon Web Services (AWS) to host some non-critical applications and workloads, 
while also maintaining an on-premises data center for sensitive data and applications.








Data Center:
Physical facility
Hosting for group of networked servers


Region: one or grp of Data Centers
Geographical area on the planet
One but usually more datacenters connected with low-latency network


Availability Zone:
->Regional feature
->Grouping of physically separate facilities
->Designed to protect from data center failures
->If zone goes down others continue working
Two service categories,
a. Zonal services (Virtual Machines, Disks, etc.)
b. Zone-redundant services (SQL, Storage, etc.)


Region Pair:
Each region is paired with another region making it a region pair
Region pairs are static and cannot be chosen
Each pair resides within the same geography
Physical isolation with at least 300 miles distance (when possible)


Geographies:
Discrete market
Typically contains two or more regions







Resource:
They represent purchased services
Object used to manage services in Azure
Saved as JSON definition
They are always placed inside one single Resoure Group.
Virtual machines, storage accounts, web apps, databases, and virtual networks are examples of resources. 
Resource groups, subscriptions, management groups, and tags are also examples of resources.


Resource Groups:
Grouping of resources


Azure Resource Manager(ARM):
Management Layer for all resources and resource groups
All the request from user through azure platform/Azure CLI/Powershell/SDK's/REST for creation/deletion/modification of a resource does through Azure Resource Manager
ARM Template









using azure throug:
• Azure Portal - Web based portal for self-service management of Azure platform
• Azure CLI - automation module for terminal
• Azure PowerShell - automation module for PowerShell
• Azure Cloud Shell - free cloud-based scripting environment




Azure CLI:
u need to install Cloud Shell for this or u can use CLI in azure platform itself.

az login


list all
az --help
or 
az -h


az group


az group -h
will give all options with group


az group list -h
this will give u what can u do with listing groups


az group list --query "[].{resourceGroupName: name, location:location}" 


az group list -o table

az group list -o yaml


az group list --query "[].{resourceGroupName: name, location:location}" -o table







Azure CLI interactive mode:
It helps in using CLI

az interactive




vm creation:
az vm create -n some_vm_name -g some_group_name --image UbuntuLTS --admin-username msuhail --generate-ssh-keys

Login after creation:
shh username@IP_of_VM
u can check the IP of a VM in the azure portal
ex:
ssh msuhail@168.63.72.214
so this log you to => msuhail@some_vm_name



In azure we change configuration like, allowing entire internet to access the VM to only specific IP ranges to access the VM









